Extend the invariant filter to specify particular invariants (#2034)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/apalache/tuning.md

### Invariant filter

`search.invariantFilter=<regex>`. Check the invariant only at the steps that
satisfy the regular expression. The regular expression should recognize words

> over of the form 's->ki', where `s` is a step number, `k` is an invariant kind

Author: Addressed in a517df1dc

> (["state" or "action"][invariants]) and `i` is a invariant number.

Author: Added a paragraph in 7cd6a21d5

> (["state" or "action"][invariants]) and `i` is a invariant number.

Reviewer: Super helpful for me, hopefully also for some other users :)

> For instance, `search.invariantFilter=10->.*|15->state0|20->action1` tells the

Author: Yeah, I was thinking about that... got a bit worried that another separating character may make things even less clear.

In my mind, reasonable use of this would wildcard either the entire LHS of `->` ("check the RHS invariant at all steps"), or the entire RHS ("check all invariants at the LHS step(s)").
In general, I feel like regexps are a bit too powerful for what we're likely to specify here, but OTOH they're also universal if someone has more esoteric filters in mind.

> For instance, `search.invariantFilter=10->.*|15->state0|20->action1` tells the

Reviewer: That line of reasoning seems convincing to me.

model checker to check

* all invariants only *after* exactly 10 steps have been made,
* the *first* state invariant only after exactly 15 steps, and

> * the *second* action invariant after exactly 20 steps.

Author: Ah, I can see how this could be confusing!
The first clause does not apply from step 10 onwards, but only *at* step 10 (hence, "*exactly* 10 steps").
Do you think it would help to reword this? Or maybe it's enough to change the emphasis from "after" to "exactly"?

> * all invariants only *after* exactly 10 steps have been made,
> * the *first* state invariant only after exactly 15 steps, and
> * the *second* action invariant after exactly 20 steps.

Reviewer: Yes, that does clear things up for me! I would suggestion perhaps something like:

```suggestion
* *all* invariants (because of the wildcard match) at the 10th step,
* the *first* state invariant (`state0`) at the 15th step, and
* the *second* action invariant (`action1`) at the 20th step.
```

> * all invariants only *after* exactly 10 steps have been made,
> * the *first* state invariant only after exactly 15 steps, and
> * the *second* action invariant after exactly 20 steps.

Author: I think we're getting close :)
Still one issue though: saying "at the Xth step" here is inaccurate, as it might refer to both the states before and after taking the step. Technically, we're actually checking it at all `(step+1)`th (symbolic) states. How about this?

```suggestion
* *all* invariants (because of the wildcard match) at states reached after the 10th step,
* the *first* state invariant (`state0`) at states reached after the 15th step, and
* the *second* action invariant (`action1`) at states reached after the 20th step.
```

> * the *second* action invariant after exactly 20 steps.

Reviewer: My issue here is that in this context I take "after" to mean "anytime from this point forward". I guess its because while you mean the plural "states" to range breadth wise over the immediate successor steps, I think the natural reading is to read it as both breadth- and depth-wise, ranging over all states that could follow.

Maybe using a phrase like "immediate successor states" would help?

> * the *second* action invariant after exactly 20 steps.

Author: I guess that's why Igor's original wording was "after exactly 10 steps", which to me communicates that it refers only to 10, not 9 or 11.
But I think you resolve the order of "after" and "exactly" differently than I do?

> * the *second* action invariant after exactly 20 steps.

Reviewer: True “after exactly 5 minutes” means to me “any time > t+5m”. Could be i am unusually fixated on an indeterminate range for “after” :)

I don’t want to get you hung up here, especially not if it’s consistent with the other docs. Maybe just merge it as is and we can revisit if other users have trouble?

[Trace invariants][] are checked regardless of this filter.

This option is useful, e.g., for checking consensus algorithms,
where the decision cannot be revoked. So instead of checking the invariant
after each step, we can do that after the algorithm has made a good number of

> steps.

Author: Good point! I've added a sentence in 7ef9a9354

> steps.

Reviewer: Perfect!
